<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Fisherman and the Draug</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="the-fisherman-and-the-draug" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2>
				<b>
					<i>The Fisherman and the Draug</i>
				</b>
			</h2>
			<p>On Kvalholm, down in Helgeland,<sup>1</sup> dwelt a poor fisherman, Elias by name, with his wife Karen, who had been in service at the parson’s over at Alstad. They had built them a hut here, and he used to go out fishing by the day about the Lofotens.</p>
			<p>There could be very little doubt that the lonely Kvalholm was haunted. Whenever her husband was away, Karen heard all manner of uncanny shrieks and noises, which could mean no good. One day, when she was up on the hillside, mowing grass to serve as winter fodder for their couple of sheep, she heard, quite plainly, a chattering on the strand beneath the hill, but look over she durst not.</p>
			<p>They had a child every year, but that was no burden, for they were both thrifty, hardworking folks. When seven years had gone by, there were six children in the house; but that same autumn Elias had scraped together so much that he thought he might now venture to buy a <i>Sexæring</i>,<sup>2</sup> and henceforward go fishing in his own boat.</p>
			<p>One day, as he was walking along with a <i>Kvejtepig</i><sup>3</sup> in his hand, and thinking the matter over, he unexpectedly came upon a monstrous seal, which lay sunning itself right behind a rock on the strand, and was as much surprised to see the man as the man was to see the seal. But Elias was not slack; from the top of the rock on which he stood, he hurled the long heavy Kvejtepig right into the monster’s back, just below the neck.</p>
			<p>The seal immediately rose up on its tail right into the air as high as a boat’s mast, and looked so evilly and viciously at him with its bloodshot eyes, at the same time showing its grinning teeth, that Elias thought he should have died on the spot for sheer fright. Then it plunged into the sea, and lashed the water into bloody foam behind it. Elias didn’t stop to see more, but that same evening there drifted into the boat place on Kvalcreek, on which his house stood, a Kvejtepole, with the hooked iron head snapped off.</p>
			<p>Elias thought no more about it, but in the course of the autumn he bought his <i>Sexæring</i>, for which he had been building a little boat-shed the whole summer.</p>
			<p>One night as he lay awake, thinking of his new <i>Sexæring</i>, it occurred to him that his boat would balance better, perhaps, if he stuck an extra log of wood on each side of it. He was so absurdly fond of the boat that it was a mere pastime for him to light a lantern and go down to have a look at it.</p>
			<p>Now as he stood looking at it there by the light of the lantern, he suddenly caught a glimpse in the corner opposite, on a coil of nets, of a face which exactly resembled the seal’s. For an instant it grinned savagely at him and the light, its mouth all the time growing larger and larger; and then a big man whisked out of the door, not so quickly, however, but that Elias could catch a glimpse, by the light of the lantern, of a long iron hooked spike sticking out of his back. And now he began to put one and two together. Still he was less anxious about his life than about his boat; so he there and then sat him down in it with the lantern, and kept watch. When his wife came in the morning, she found him sleeping there, with the burnt-out lantern by his side.</p>
			<p>One morning in January, while he was out fishing in his boat with two other men, he heard, in the dark, a voice from a skerry at the very entrance of the creek. It laughed scornfully, and said, “When it <i>comes to a Femböring</i>,<sup>4</sup> Elias, look to thyself!”</p>
			<p>But there was many a long year yet before it <i>did</i> come to that; but one autumn, when his son Bernt was sixteen, Elias knew he could manage it, so he took his whole family with him in his boat to Ranen,<sup>5</sup> to exchange his <i>Sexæring</i> for a <i>Femböring</i>. The only person left at home was a little Finn girl, whom they had taken into service some few years before, and who had only lately been confirmed.</p>
			<p>Now there was a boat, a little <i>Femböring</i>, for four men and a boy, that Elias just then had his eye upon⁠—a boat which the best boat-builder in the place had finished and tarred over that very autumn. Elias had a very good notion of what a boat should be, and it seemed to him that he had never seen a <i>Femböring</i> so well built <i>below</i> the waterline. <i>Above</i> the waterline, indeed, it looked only middling, so that, to one of less experience than himself, the boat would have seemed rather a heavy goer than otherwise, and anything but a smart craft.</p>
			<p>Now the boat-master knew all this just as well as Elias. He said he thought it would be the swiftest sailer in Ranen, but that Elias should have it cheap, all the same, if only he would promise one thing, and that was, to make no alteration whatever in the boat, nay, not so much as adding a fresh coat of tar. Only when Elias had expressly given his word upon it did he get the boat.</p>
			<p>But “yon laddie”<sup>6</sup> who had taught the boat-master how to build his boats so cunningly <i>below</i> the waterline⁠—<i>above</i> the waterline he had had to use his native wits, and they were scant enough⁠—must surely have been there beforehand, and bidden him both sell it cheaply, so that Elias might get it, and stipulate besides that the boat should not be looked at too closely. In this way it escaped the usual tarring fore and aft.</p>
			<p>Elias now thought about sailing home, but went first into the town, provided himself and family with provisions against Christmas, and indulged in a little nip of brandy besides. Glad as he was over the day’s bargain, he, and his wife too, took an extra drop in their e’en, and their son Bernt had a taste of it too.</p>
			<p>After that they sailed off homewards in their new boat. There was no other ballast in the boat but himself, his old woman, the children, and the Christmas provisions. His son Bernt sat by the mainsheet; his wife, helped by her next eldest son, held the sail-ropes; Elias himself sat at the rudder, while the two younger brothers of twelve and fourteen were to take it in turns to bail out.</p>
			<p>They had eight miles of sea to sail over, and when they got into the open, it was plain that the boat would be tested pretty stiffly on its first voyage. A gale was gradually blowing up, and crests of foam began to break upon the heavy sea.</p>
			<p>And now Elias saw what sort of a boat he really had. She skipped over the waves like a sea-mew; not so much as a splash came into the boat, and he therefore calculated that he would have no need to take in all his clews<sup>7</sup> against the wind, which an ordinary <i>Femböring</i> would have been forced to do in such weather.</p>
			<p>Out on the sea, not very far away from him, he saw another <i>Femböring</i>, with a full crew, and four clews in the sail, just like his own. It lay on the same course, and he thought it rather odd that he had not noticed it before. It made as if it would race him, and when Elias perceived that, he could not for the life of him help letting out a clew again.</p>
			<p>And now he went racing along like a dart, past capes and islands and rocks, till it seemed to Elias as if he had never had such a splendid sail before. Now, too, the boat showed itself what it really was, the best boat in Ranen.</p>
			<p>The weather, meantime, had become worse, and they had already got a couple of dangerous seas right upon them. They broke in over the mainsheet in the forepart of the boat where Bernt sat, and sailed out again to leeward near the stern.</p>
			<p>Since the gloom had deepened, the other boat had kept almost alongside, and they were now so close together that they could easily have pitched the baling-can from one to the other.</p>
			<p>So they raced on, side by side, in constantly stiffer seas, till nightfall, and beyond it. The fourth clew ought now to have been taken in again, but Elias didn’t want to give in, and thought he might bide a bit till they took it in in the other boat also, which they needs <i>must</i> do soon. Ever and anon the brandy-flask was brought out and passed round, for they had now both cold and wet to hold out against.</p>
			<p>The sea-fire, which played on the dark billows near Elias’s own boat, shone with an odd vividness in the foam round the other boat, just as if a fire-shovel was ploughing up and turning over the water. In the bright phosphorescence he could plainly make out the rope-ends on board her. He could also see distinctly the folks on board, with their sou’westers on their heads; but as their larboard side lay nearest, of course they all had their backs towards him, and were well-nigh hidden by the high heeling hull.</p>
			<p>Suddenly a tremendous roller burst upon them. Elias had long caught a glimpse of its white crest through the darkness, right over the prow where Bernt sat. It filled the whole boat for a moment, the planks shook and trembled beneath the weight of it, and then, as the boat, which had lain half on her beam-ends, righted herself and sped on again, it streamed off behind to leeward.</p>
			<p>While it was still upon him, he fancied he heard a hideous yell from the other boat; but when it was over, his wife, who sat by the shrouds, said, with a voice which pierced his very soul: “Good God, Elias! the sea has carried off Martha and Nils!”⁠—their two youngest children, the first nine, the second seven years old, who had been sitting in the hold near Bernt. Elias merely answered: “Don’t let go the lines, Karen, or you’ll lose yet more!”</p>
			<p>They had now to take in the fourth clew, and, when this was done, Elias found that it would be well to take in the fifth and last clew too, for the gale was ever on the increase; but, on the other hand, in order to keep the boat free of the constantly heavier seas, he dare not lessen the sail a bit more than he was absolutely obliged to do; but they found that the scrap of sail they could carry gradually grew less and less. The sea seethed so that it drove right into their faces, and Bernt and his next eldest brother Anthony, who had hitherto helped his mother with the sail-lines, had, at last, to hold in the yards, an expedient one only resorts to when the boat cannot bear even the last clew⁠—here the fifth.</p>
			<p>The companion boat, which had disappeared in the meantime, now suddenly ducked up alongside again, with precisely the same amount of sail as Elias’s boat; but he now began to feel that he didn’t quite like the look of the crew on board there. The two who stood and held in the yards (he caught a glimpse of their pale faces beneath their sou’westers) seemed to him, by the odd light of the shining foam, more like corpses than men, nor did they speak a single word.</p>
			<p>A little way off to larboard he again caught sight of the high white back of a fresh roller coming through the dark, and he got ready betimes to receive it. The boat was laid to with its prow turned aslant towards the on-rushing wave, while the sail was made as large as possible, so as to get up speed enough to cleave the heavy sea and sail out of it again. In rushed the roller with a roar like a foss; again, for an instant, they lay on their beam ends; but, when it was over, the wife no longer sat by the sail ropes, nor did Anthony stand there any longer holding the yards⁠—they had both gone overboard.</p>
			<p>This time also Elias fancied he heard the same hideous yell in the air; but in the midst of it he plainly heard his wife anxiously calling him by name. All that he said when he grasped the fact that she was washed overboard, was, “In Jesus’ Name!” His first and dearest wish was to follow after her, but he felt at the same time that it became him to save the rest of the freight he had on board, that is to say, Bernt and his other two sons, one twelve, the other fourteen years old, who had been baling out for a time, but had afterwards taken their places in the stern behind him.</p>
			<p>Bernt had now to look to the yards all alone, and the other two helped as best they could. The rudder Elias durst not let slip, and he held it fast with a hand of iron, which continuous exertion had long since made insensible to feeling.</p>
			<p>A moment afterwards the comrade boat ducked up again: it had vanished for an instant as before. Now, too, he saw more of the heavy man who sat in the stern there in the same place as himself. Out of his back, just below his sou’wester (as he turned round it showed quite plainly), projected an iron spike six inches long, which Elias had no difficulty in recognising again. And now, as he calmly thought it all over, he was quite clear about two things: one was that it was the <i>Draug</i><sup>8</sup> itself which was steering its half-boat close beside him, and leading him to destruction; the other was that it was written in heaven that he was to sail his last course that night. For he who sees the Draug on the sea is a doomed man. He said nothing to the others, lest they should lose heart, but in secret he commended his soul to God.</p>
			<p>During the last hour or so he had been forced out of his proper course by the storm; the air also had become dense with snow; and Elias knew that he must wait till dawn before land could be sighted. Meanwhile he sailed along much the same as before. Now and then the boys in the stern complained that they were freezing; but, in the plight they were now in, that couldn’t be helped, and, besides, Elias had something else to think about. A terrible longing for vengeance had come over him, and, but for the necessity of saving the lives of his three lads, he would have tried by a sudden turn to sink the accursed boat which kept alongside of him the whole time as if to mock him; he now understood its evil errand only too well. If the <i>Kvejtepig</i><sup>9</sup> could reach the Draug before, a knife or a gaff might surely do the same thing now, and he felt that he would gladly have given his life for one good grip of the being who had so mercilessly torn from him his dearest in this world and would fain have still more.</p>
			<p>At three or four o’clock in the morning they saw coming upon them through the darkness a breaker of such a height that at first Elias thought they must be quite close ashore near the surf swell. Nevertheless, he soon recognised it for what it really was⁠—a huge billow. Then it seemed to him as if there was a laugh over in the other boat, and something said, “There goes thy boat, Elias!” He, foreseeing the calamity, now cried aloud: “In Jesus’ Name!” and then bade his sons hold on with all their might to the withy-bands by the rowlocks when the boat went under, and not let go till it was above the water again. He made the elder of them go forward to Bernt; and himself held the youngest close by his side, stroked him once or twice furtively down the cheeks, and made sure that he had a good grip. The boat, literally buried beneath the foaming roller, was lifted gradually up by the bows and then went under. When it rose again out of the water, with the keel in the air, Elias, Bernt, and the twelve-year-old Martin lay alongside, holding on by the withy-bands; but the third of the brothers was gone.</p>
			<p>They had now first of all to get the shrouds on one side cut through, so that the mast might come to the surface alongside instead of disturbing the balance of the boat below; and then they must climb up on the swaying bottom of the boat and stave in the keyholes, to let out the air which kept the boat too high in the water, and so ease her. After great exertions they succeeded, and Elias, who had got up on the top first, now helped the other two up after him.</p>
			<p>There they sat through the long dark winter night, clinging convulsively on by their hands and knees to the boat’s bottom, which was drenched by the billows again and again.</p>
			<p>After the lapse of a couple of hours died Martin, whom his father had held up the whole time as far as he was able, of sheer exhaustion, and glided down into the sea. They had tried to cry for help several times, but gave it up at last as a bad job.</p>
			<p>Whilst they two thus sat all alone on the bottom of the boat, Elias said to Bernt he must now needs believe that he too was about to be “along o’ mother!”<sup>10</sup> but that he had a strong hope that Bernt, at any rate, would be saved, if he only held out like a man. Then he told him all about the <i>Draug</i>, whom he had struck below the neck with the <i>Kvejtepig</i>, and how it had now revenged itself upon him, and certainly would not forbear till it was “quits with him.”</p>
			<p>It was towards nine o’clock in the morning when the grey dawn began to appear. Then Elias gave to Bernt, who sat alongside him, his silver watch with the brass chain, which he had snapped in two in order to drag it from beneath his closely buttoned jacket. He held on for a little time longer, but, as it got lighter, Bernt saw that his father’s face was deadly pale, his hair too had parted here and there, as often happens when death is at hand, and his skin was chafed off his hands from holding on to the keel. The son understood now that his father was nearly at the last gasp, and tried, so far as the pitching and tossing would allow it, to hold him up; but when Elias marked it, he said, “Nay, look to thyself, Bernt, and hold on fast. I go to mother⁠—in Jesus’ Name!” and with that he cast himself down headlong from the top of the boat.</p>
			<p>Everyone who has sat on the keel of a boat long enough knows that when the sea has got its own it grows much calmer, though not immediately. Bernt now found it easier to hold on, and still more of hope came to him with the brightening day. The storm abated, and, when it got quite light, it seemed to him that he knew where he was, and that it was outside his own homestead, Kvalholm, that he lay driving.</p>
			<p>He now began again to cry for help, but his chief hope was in a current which he knew bore landwards at a place where a headland broke in upon the surge, and there the water was calmer. And he did, in fact, drive closer and closer in, and came at last so near to one of the rocks that the mast, which was floating by the side of the boat all the time, surged up and down in the swell against the sloping cliff. Stiff as he now was in all his limbs from sitting and holding on, he nevertheless succeeded, after a great effort, in clambering up the cliff, where he hauled the mast ashore, and made the <i>Femböring</i> fast.</p>
			<p>The Finn girl, who was alone in the house, had been thinking, for the last two hours, that she had heard cries for help from time to time, and as they kept on she mounted the hill to see what it was. There she saw Bernt up on the cliff, and the overturned <i>Femböring</i> bobbing up and down against it. She immediately dashed down to the boat-place, got out the old rowing-boat, and rowed along the shore and round the island right out to him.</p>
			<p>Bernt lay sick under her care the whole winter through, and didn’t go a fishing all that year. Ever after this, too, it seemed to folks as if the lad were a little bit daft.</p>
			<p>On the open sea he never would go again, for he had got the sea-scare. He wedded the Finn girl, and moved over to Malang, where he got him a clearing in the forest, and he lives there now, and is doing well, they say.</p>
			<p>[1] A district in northern Norway.</p>
			<p>[2] A boat with three oars on each side.</p>
			<p>[3] A long pole, with a hooked iron spike at the end of it, for spearing Kvejte or hallibut with.</p>
			<p>[4] A large boat with five oars on each side, used for winter fishing in northern Norway.</p>
			<p>[5] The chief port in those parts.</p>
			<p>[6] <i>Hin Karen</i> = “the devil.” <i>Karen</i> is the Danish <i>Karl</i>.</p>
			<p>[7] The <i>Klör</i>, or clews, were rings in the corner of the sail to fasten it down by in a strong wind. <i>Setja ei Klo</i> = “take in the sail a clew.” <i>Setja tvo</i>, or <i>tri Klör</i> = “take it in two or three clews,” <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i>, diminish it still further as the wind grew stronger.</p>
			<p>[8] A demon peculiar to the north Norwegian coast. It rides the seas in a half-boat. Compare Icelandic <i>draugr</i>.</p>
			<p>[9] See note 3 above.</p>
			<p>[10] <i>Være med hu, Mor. Hu</i> is the Danish <i>Hun</i>.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
